If you’re not into regular exercise, putting together an exercise plan can be a bummer.

But remember, along with your diet and medications, regular physical activity is an important part of managing diabetes or dealing with prediabetes. Because when you’re active, your cells become more sensitive to insulin so it works more effectively to lower your blood glucose, also known as blood sugar. (You might notice that exercising sometimes raises your blood glucose, find out why.)

Exercise just makes you feel better. So, however you want to do it—taking regular walks around the block, going for a run, or signing up for a marathon—getting started is the most important part.

How to get started exercising safely 
It doesn’t matter where you are physically. If you’ve never set foot in a gym, that’s okay—as long as you start doing something now. If you haven’t been very active or are worried about your health, it’s important to consult your doctor and start slowly.

Light walking is a great place to start—and a great habit to incorporate into your life. Walk with a loved one, with your dog, or just by yourself while listening to an audio book. Set goals every day and meet them and you’ll start feeling like you’re back in control of your life. Learn more about how to get started safely.

Even little changes make a big difference
If you’re still struggling with getting started or feeling overwhelmed by the idea of starting a more active life, take heart: every change, no matter how small, makes a difference in your ability to manage diabetes. Even losing 10–15 pounds can have a significant impact on your health. The power to change is firmly in your hands—so get moving today.

It doesn’t matter whether you’ve been active in the past or not—you can still start now. But, if you have never been active or have not been active for a while, it is important to start slowly.

Light activities like walking are fine for most people with diabetes. If you haven’t been active and feel unsure about your health, talk to your health care provider before doing anything more demanding. If you have any diabetes complications, there may be certain exercises you should avoid.

There are a few ways that exercise lowers blood glucose (also known as blood sugar):

Insulin sensitivity is increased, so your muscle cells are better able to use any available insulin to take up glucose during and after activity.
When your muscles contract during activity, your cells are able to take up glucose and use it for energy whether insulin is available or not.
This is how exercise can help lower blood glucose in the short term. And when you are active on a regular basis, it can also lower your A1C.

Understanding Your Blood Glucose and Exercise
The effect physical activity has on your blood glucose will vary depending on how long you are active and many other factors. Physical activity can lower your blood glucose up to 24 hours or more after your workout by making your body more sensitive to insulin.

Become familiar with how your blood glucose responds to exercise. Checking your blood glucose level more often before and after exercise can help you see the benefits of activity. You also can use the results of your blood glucose checks to see how your body reacts to different activities. Understanding these patterns can help you prevent your blood glucose from going too high or too low.

Increasing your activity level is great for your diabetes and for your overall health, but it should be an enjoyable and safe experience. Here are a few simple things you can do to help prevent injuries, dehydration, and hypoglycemia when exercising:

If you have never been active or haven't been active for a while, start slowly. If you feel unsure about your health, talk to your health care team about which activities are safest for you. 

Your health care provider’s advice will depend on the condition of your heart, blood vessels, eyes, kidneys, feet, and nervous system. Still, many people with diabetes can do the same activities as someone without diabetes.
 
Warm up for 5 minutes before starting to exercise and cool down for 5 minutes after. 

Your warm up or cool down should be a lower intensity than the rest of your time exercising. This helps get your blood flowing and warms up your joints.
 
Avoid doing activity in extremely hot or cold temperatures. Choose indoor options when the weather is extreme.
 
Drink plenty of water before, during, and after activity to stay hydrated.
 
If you feel a low coming on, be ready to test for it and treat it. Always carry a source of carbohydrate with you so you’ll be ready to treat low blood glucose (also known as low blood sugar). This is especially important if you are on insulin and have type 1 diabetes.
 
If exercising for an extended period (more than an hour or two), you may want to have a sports drink that provides carbohydrates. Be careful to check the nutrition facts though, you may need to water down the drink so that you don’t have too much, which can cause your blood sugar to spike.
 
Wear a medical identification bracelet, necklace, or a medical ID tag that identifies you as someone with diabetes in case of emergency, and carry a cell phone with you in case you need to call someone for assistance.
 
Activities should be energizing but not overly difficult. 

Use the “talk test” to make sure you are not pushing yourself too hard. If you become short of breath and you can’t talk, then slow down. This is most important when you are just starting to increase the activity in your routine. As you become fit, you’ll be able to exercise at a higher intensity and chat with others while you do it.
 
Take care of your feet by wearing shoes and clean socks that fit you well. 

You should also check inside your shoes before wearing them. Shoes with silica gel or air mid-soles are a good choice for weight-bearing activities like walking because they are built to reduce stress on your feet and joints. Socks that are made out of a material that reduces friction and pulls moisture away from your skin can also help protect your feet. Some examples are CoolMax, polypropylene, or acrylic (stay away from cotton). 
 
Carefully inspect your feet before and after activity for blisters, redness, or other signs of irritation. Talk to your doctor if you have a foot injury or a non-healing blister, cut, or sore.
 
Stop doing an activity if you feel any pain, shortness of breath, or light-headedness. Talk to your doctor about any unusual symptoms that you experience.


