Type 1 diabetes means using insulin. However, if you have type 2 diabetes, treatment plans can change depending on who you are.  Some people can manage it with healthy eating and exercise, or with oral medications, while others may also need to use insulin.

It’s common for your medication needs to change over time. And that’s a good thing. The most important thing is to get to feeling your best.

A Quick Guide to Insulin
If you’re just starting out with insulin, it can take a little getting used to. With a little practice, you’ll be a pro in no time.

Insulin is a naturally occurring hormone secreted by your pancreas. If you are prescribed insulin, it may be because your body doesn’t produce it (type 1 diabetes) or your body doesn’t use it properly (type 2 diabetes).

There are many different types of insulin sold in the United States, which differ in how they’re made, how they work in the body, and how much they cost. It’s also available in different strengths—most commonly, U-100. Your doctor will help you find the right type of insulin for your health needs.

When it comes to syringes, your doctor will advise on which capacity you need based on your insulin dose. In general, smaller capacity syringes can be easier to read and draw an accurate dose. Here are some tips:

If your largest dose is close to the syringe's maximum capacity, consider buying the next size up in case your dosage changes
If you need to measure doses in half units, be sure to choose a syringe that has these markings
If you're traveling outside of the United States, be certain to match your insulin strength with the correct size syringe

How It Works
When it comes to insulin, you’ll get to know three terms: onset, peak time, and duration. The onset is how long it takes for the insulin to start lowering your blood glucose. The peak time is when it’s at its maximum strength, and duration is how long it continues to work.

Here’s a quick look at the different types of insulin. If you need a mix of two types, you can talk to your doctor about getting a premixed supply.

Rapid-acting insulin begins to work about 15 minutes after injection, peaks in about 1 hour, and continues to work for 2 to 4 hours

Regular or short-acting insulin usually reaches the bloodstream within 30 minutes after injection, peaks anywhere from 2 to 3 hours after injection, and is effective for approximately 3 to 6 hours

Intermediate-acting insulin generally reaches the bloodstream about 2 to 4 hours after injection, peaks 4 to 12 hours later, and is effective for about 12 to 18 hours

Long-acting insulin reaches the bloodstream several hours after injection and tends to lower glucose levels fairly evenly over a 24-hour period

There are different types of insulin depending on how quickly they work, when they peak and how long they last.
Insulin is available in different strengths; the most common is U-100.
All insulin available in the United States is manufactured in a laboratory, but animal insulin can still be imported for personal use.
Inside the pancreas, the hormone insulin is made in the beta cells, which are part of the Islets of Langerhans. These islets also have alpha cells, which make glucagon, as well as delta cells. With each meal, beta cells release insulin to help the body use or store the blood glucose (blood sugar) it gets from food.

In the beta cells, insulin is created first as a big molecule called “proinsulin.” Proinsulin is broken into two pieces: insulin and C-peptide. C-peptide is important especially when determining treatment because it can be used to measure how much insulin a person is making. The more C-peptide a person has, the more insulin they are making. This can help a provider determine how much insulin to prescribe. 

In people with type 1 diabetes, the pancreas no longer makes insulin. The beta cells have been destroyed and they need insulin shots to use glucose from meals.

People with type 2 diabetes make insulin, but their bodies don't respond well to it. Some people with type 2 diabetes need diabetes pills or insulin shots to help their bodies use glucose for energy.

Insulin cannot be taken as a pill because it would be broken down during digestion just like the protein in food. It must be injected into the fat under your skin for it to get into your blood. In some rare cases insulin can lead to an allergic reaction at the injection site. Talk to your doctor if you believe you may be experiencing a reaction.

Types of insulin
Rapid-Acting Insulin: It begins to work about 15 minutes after injection, peaks in about one or two hours after injection, and last between two to four hours. Types: insulin aspart (Fiasp, NovoLog) Insulin glulisine (Apidra), and insulin lispro (Admelog, Humalog, Lyumjev)
Regular or Short-Acting Insulin: It usually reaches the bloodstream within 30 minutes after injection, peaks anywhere from two to three hours after injection, and is effective for approximately three to six hours. Types: Human Regular (Humulin R, Novolin R, Velosulin R)
Intermediate-Acting Insulin: It generally reaches the bloodstream about two to four hours after injection, peaks four to 12 hours later, and is effective for about 12 to 18 hours. Types: NPH (Humulin N, Novolin N, ReliOn)
Long-Acting Insulin: It reaches the bloodstream several hours after injection and tends to lower glucose levels up to 24 hours. Types: degludec (Tresiba), detemir (Levemir), and glargine (Basaglar, Lantus)
Ultra Long-Acting Insulin: It reaches the blood stream in six hours, does not peak, and lasts about 36 hours or longer. Types: glargine U-300 (Toujeo)
Premixed insulin can be helpful for people who have trouble drawing up insulin out of two bottles and reading the correct directions and dosages. It is also useful for those who have poor eyesight or dexterity and is convenient for people whose diabetes has been stabilized on this combination.

In 2015 an inhaled insulin product, Afrezza, became available in the U.S. Afrezza is a rapid-acting inhaled insulin that is administered at the beginning of each meal and can be used by adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Afrezza is not a substitute for long-acting insulin. Afrezza must be used in combination with injectable long-acting insulin in patients with type 1 diabetes and in type 2 patients who use long-acting insulin.

Inhaled insulin begins working within 12 to 15 minutes, peaks by 30 minutes, and is out of your system in 180 minutes. Types: Technosphere insulin-inhalation system (Afrezza)
Advertisement
Characteristics of insulin
Insulin has three characteristics:

Onset is the length of time before insulin reaches the bloodstream and begins lowering blood glucose.
Peak time is the time during which insulin is at maximum strength in terms of lowering blood glucose.
Duration is how long insulin continues to lower blood glucose.
Insulin strength
All insulins come dissolved or suspended in liquids. The standard and most commonly used strength in the United States today is U-100, which means it has 100 units of insulin per milliliter of fluid, though U-500 insulin is available for patients who are extremely insulin resistant.

U-40, which has 40 units of insulin per milliliter of fluid, has generally been phased out around the world, but it is possible that it could still be found in some places (and U-40 insulin is still used in veterinary care).

If you're traveling outside of the U.S., be certain to match your insulin strength with the correct size syringe.

