Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and sarcopenia (low skeletal muscle mass and function) share a bidirectional relationship. The prevalence of these diseases increases with age and they share common risk factors. Skeletal muscle fat infiltration, commonly referred to as myosteatosis, may be a major contributor to both T2DM and sarcopenia in older adults via independent effects on insulin resistance and muscle health. Many strategies to manage T2DM result in energy restriction and subsequent weight loss, and this can lead to significant declines in muscle mass in the absence of resistance exercise, which is also a first-line treatment for sarcopenia. In this review, we highlight recent evidence on established treatments and emerging therapies targeting weight loss and muscle mass and function improvements in older adults with, or at risk of, T2DM and/or sarcopenia. This includes dietary, physical activity and exercise interventions, new generation incretin-based agonists and myostatin-based antagonists, and endoscopic bariatric therapies. We also highlight how digital health technologies and health literacy interventions can increase uptake of, and adherence to, established and emerging treatments and therapies in older adults with T2DM and/or sarcopenia.

Globally, almost 500 million individuals have type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and prevalence is increasing [1]. Most adults with T2DM have overweight or obesity [2] and the hallmark characteristic of this disease, insulin resistance, leads to vascular complications and subsequent adverse outcomes [3,4]. T2DM is most prevalent in older adults [1] and associated with age-related conditions, including the skeletal muscle disease sarcopenia [5-7]. Sarcopenia is characterised as the age-related decline in skeletal muscle mass and function [8-10], and 10% to 27% of older adults have this condition [11]. Sarcopenia is associated with adverse outcomes including higher risk of falls, fractures, and premature mortality [12-14]. Sarcopenia has a bidirectional relationship with T2DM as components of both diseases worsen each other via positive feedback loops [5-7]. This review explores recent evidence on the relationship between T2DM and sarcopenia, including established and emerging treatments for managing these diseases, individually or concurrently.

There are several operational definitions of sarcopenia (Table 1) [8-10], resulting in inconsistent prevalence estimates and associations between sarcopenia and adverse outcomes. The most widely adopted is the revised European Working Group on Sarcopenia in Older People (EWGSOP) definition. The EWGSOP diagnoses sarcopenia as the presence of low muscle strength and mass, and determines severity based on physical performance [8]. Recently, the Australian and New Zealand Society for Sarcopenia and Frailty Research (ANZSSFR) published a Delphi method-based consensus statement supporting the use of this definition in Australia and New Zealand [15]. The Asian Working Group for Sarcopenia’s (AWGS) revised definition requires low muscle mass in the presence of low muscle strength or poor physical performance to diagnose sarcopenia, with the presence of all three identifying severe cases [9]. The Sarcopenia Definitions and Outcomes Consortium (SDOC) [10] used statistical procedures to identify cut-points for sarcopenia based on clinical outcomes, resulting in the omission of low muscle mass as a requisite for the diagnosis of sarcopenia, and requiring only low muscle (hand grip) strength and poor physical performance (slow gait speed). The SDOC reported that low relative strength (i.e., low muscle strength scaled to measures of body size), was more consistently predictive of clinical outcomes compared with absolute muscle strength [12]. Overweight and obesity based on body mass index (BMI) are associated with higher absolute, but lower relative, muscle mass and strength [16-18], and it may therefore be appropriate to utilise relative muscle cut-points in populations with T2DM to ensure these individuals receive appropriate access to sarcopenia management interventions.

